.. _tutorial:

========
Tutorial
========

A tutorial introduction to using the PyTOPKAPI model is provided by
way of an example simulation, set-up for the Liebenbergsvlei catchment
in central South Africa. The tutorial materials for the example can be
separately downloaded at http://github.com/sahg/PyTOPKAPI/downloads.

Description of the example
==========================

The example consists of a simulation of 42 days (lasting from
15/03/2000 to 26/04/2000) over a sub-catchment (3563 km2, defined by
the flow station 2 in Figure 1 – station labelled C8H020) of the
Liebenbergsvlei catchment. The simulations will be achieved at a
6-hour time-step at a spatial resolution of 1 km.

.. figure:: _static/figures/sub-catchment-layout.png
   :alt: Sub-catchment layout
   :align: center

   **Figure 1:** The Liebenbergsvlei catchment (delimited by the flow
   station 1) and the simulated sub-catchment in pink (delimited by
   the flow station 2).

Running the model
=================

Input data
----------

In the directory TOPKAPI_Example/ is a directory called run_the_model/
that contains one file (TOPKAPI.ini) and two sub-directories
(forcing_variables/ and parameter_files/).

In the directory forcing_variables/ are 3 files:

*rainfield.h5 and ET.h5*: these two files are respectively the rain
fields and the evapotranspiration fields. The files are compressed
binary files in a HDF5 format. The file structure can be easily seen
(Figure 2) with the interface software HDF_Explorer provided in the
directory Software_package. The file rainfields.h5 and ET.h5 are both
composed of 1 group called sample_event. For the file rainfields.h5
the group contains one table called rainfall. For the file ET.h5 the
group contains two tables called ETr and ETo, being respectively the
reference crop evapotranspiration and the free surface reference
evapotranspiration. In the tables rainfall, ETr and ETo the columns
are the cells and the lines are the time steps.

*external_lesotho_flows.dat*: this file contains the external flows
coming from Lesotho via the inter-basin transfer tunnel whose outlet
is located at the Southern part of the catchment (see Figure 1). It is
a simple 6 columns format in an ASCII format file containing the date
(year, month, day, hour, minute) and the discharge at the outlet of
the tunnel in m3/s (Figure 3).


.. figure:: _static/figures/forcing-vars-HDFExplorer.png
   :alt: Forcing variables
   :align: center

   **Figure 2:** Forcing variable file rainfields.h5 and ET.h5
   visualized with the software HDF_Explorer.


.. figure:: _static/figures/ext-flows.png
   :alt: External flows ASCII
   :align: center

   **Figure 3:** File external_lesotho_flows.dat : a simple column
   ASCII format containing the external flows coming in the catchment
   from the Lesotho by a tunnel.

The directory parameter_files/ contains the two parameter files
required by the TOPKAPI model:

*global_param.dat*: it is an ASCII file containing all the parameters
that are constant in the model. In the first line are the names of the
variables. The values of the variables are reported in the second line
(Figure 4).

.. figure:: _static/figures/global-params.png
   :alt: Global parameter file
   :align: center

   **Figure 4:** File global_param.dat: an ASCII file containing all
   the parameters that are constant for a given catchment.

From left to right in the file the reported parameters are:

:math:`X` is the lateral dimension of the grid-cell (in :math:`m`).

:math:`\Delta t` is the time step of the model (in s)

:math:`\alpha_s` is a dimensionless pore-size distribution parameter
(Brooks and Corey, 1964)

:math:`\alpha_o` and :math:`\alpha_c` are the well known power
coefficient equal to 5/3 originating from Manning’s equation.

:math:`A_{threshold}` is the area over which a cell is considered to
initiate a river channel (in :math:`m^2`)

:math:`W_{min}` is the minimum width of channel (in m)

:math:`W_{max}` is the maximum width of channel (in m)

*cell_param.dat*: it is an ASCII file containing all the parameters that
are spatially variable in the model. It is composed of 17 columns
corresponding to 17 parameters (see Figure 5). Each line is a
catchment cell, thus for our example (catchment area of 3563 km2 at a
resolution of 1km2) the file is composed of 3563 lines.

.. figure:: _static/figures/cell-params.png
   :alt: Cell parameter file
   :align: center

   **Figure 5:** File cell_param.dat: an ASCII file containing all the
   parameters that are spatially variable in the model.

From left to right in the file the parameters are (note that the
parameters are not labelled inside the file, but we identify them here
by their column labels in the Excel list in Figure 5):

A. cell_label an integer labelling the cell

B. coorx the longitude of the centre of the cell (in UTM)

C. coory the latitude of the centre of the cell (in UTM)

D. :math:`\lambda` equal to 1 if the cell is a channel cell, 0
   otherwise.

E. :math:`X_c` is the length of the channel cell (in m)

F. Dam 1 if the cell is a dam cell, 0 otherwise. (This option is not
   yet available in the model, but space is open for further
   developments)

G. :math:`tan(\beta)` the tangent of the ground slope angle
   :math:`\beta`

H. :math:`tan(\beta_{channel})` the tangent of the channel slope angle
   :math:`\beta_{channel}`

I. :math:`L` the soil depth (in :math:`m`)

J. :math:`K_s` the saturated hydraulic conductivity (in :math:`mm/s`)

K. :math:`\theta_r` the residual soil moisture content

L. :math:`\theta_s` the saturated soil moisture content

M. :math:`n_o` the Manning’s roughness coefficient for overland flows

N. :math:`n_c` the Manning’s roughness coefficient for the channel
   flows

O. *cell_down* the label of the cell down.

P. :math:`pV_s^{t_0}` the initial saturation of the soil reservoir (in
   %)

Q. :math:`V_o^{t_0}` the initial water content of the overland
   reservoir (in :math:`m^3`)

R. :math:`Q_c^{t_0}` the initial discharge in the channel (in
   :math:`m^3/s`)

S. :math:`K_c` the crop coefficient

TOPKAPI.ini (in the directory run_the_model) is the input file (text
file) required to run the model.  It contains 6 main labels
(`[input_files]`, `[output_files]`, `[groups]`, `[external_flow]`,
`[numerical_options]` and `[calib_params]`, see Figure 6).

In `[input_files]` are reported all the parameter and forcing files
required by the model (labelled as file_global_param, file_cell_param,
file_rain, file_ET).

In `[output_files]` is reported file_out an HDF format file in which
will be written the simulation results.

In `[groups]` is reported the name of the group considered in the
forcing HDF files.

In `[external_flow]` are reported: a Boolean parameter called
external_flow, which is True when external flows are coming into the
catchment, False otherwise; the coordinates Xexternal_flow and
Yexternal_flow of the point where the flows come in;
file_Qexternal_flow the file containing the discharge series of
external flows.

In `[numerical_options]` are reported three variable solve_s, solve_o,
solve_c, which take the value 1 to solve the ODE of respectively the
soil, overland and channel reservoir by using a combination between
the Quasi Analytical Solution and the Runge Kutta Fehlberg methods,
the value 0 is set when only the Runge Kutta Felhberg method is to be
used.

In `[calib_params]` are reported the four multiplying factors fac_L,
fac_Ks, fac_n_o and fac_n_c that are applied on the a priori estimated
parameters L, Ks, n_o and n_c. The factors proposed in the example
come from the calibration procedure realized on the Liebenbergsvlei
catchment.

.. figure:: _static/figures/topkapi-ini.png
   :alt: Main configuration file
   :align: center

   **Figure 6:** TOPKAPI.ini is the input file (text file) required to
   run the model.

Tutorial
--------

Open the directory TOPKAPI_Example/. It contains three sub-directories
that correspond to the three steps of the process presented in the
introduction (create_the_parameter_files, run_the_model and
analyse_the_results).  In addition there is a small file called
run_example.py which is a Python command file, designed to run the
tutorial in one action.  The following discussion takes the reader
step-by-step through the process to provide a better idea of the
structure of the processes.

Open a Python shell
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Open a command shell for Python.
If you installed IPython on Windows then click on Start-All programs-IPython.

Run the model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Type the following commands in the Python Shell (the shell commands
are hereafter highlighted in grey)::

	# import the package pytopkapi
	import pytopkapi
	# navigate to the TOPKAPI_Example directory
	cd C:\ … \TOPKAPI_Example
	# Run the model using the supplied configuration
	pytopkapi.model.run('run_the_model/TOPKAPI.ini')

The simulation starts and will last around 3 to 5 minutes depending on
your machine. Some comments are written and the number of time steps
(to 169 of 6 hours each) scrolls followed by ‘***** THE END *****’.
Leave the iPython window open - we will use it shortly.

At the end of the simulation, a folder `results` should have been
created in the run_the_model folder, containing an HDF5 file called
Example_simulation_results.h5; to open it you will have to associate
the file (if it’s the first *.h5 file you’ve opened) with
HDF_Explorer. This file is composed of three groups: Channel, Overland
and Soil. The group Channel contains the table Qc_out that is the
channel flow of each cell (in m3/s) [to view a file’s content, double
click on the little green square under the yellow label in the left
panel of the window - see Figure 7.]  The group Overland contains the
table V_o that is the volume of the overland reservoir (in m3). The
group Soil contains the table V_s that is the volume of the soil
reservoir (in m3). For the three tables Qc_out, V_o and V_s, the 3563
columns are the cells and the 170 rows are the time steps.

.. figure:: _static/figures/sim-results.png
   :alt: Simulation results
   :align: center

   **Figure 7:** File Example_simulation_results.h5 in which are
   written the simulation results.

Analysing the simulations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The analysis of the simulations consist of two simple modules that
allow the user to (i) plot the rainfall-runoff graphic (simulated and
observed discharge and rainfall on the same graph), module called
plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain and (ii) plot maps of soil moisture over the
catchment, module called plot_soil_moisture_maps.

a.Plot of the rainfall runoff graphic

The directory TOPKAPI_Example/ contains a directory called
analyse_the_results/.  In analyse_the_results/ the results are three
files amongst them plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain.ini and
C8H020_6h_Obs_Example.dat.

C8H020_6h_Obs_Example.dat is an ASCII file in a column format
containing the date and the value of discharge (in :math:`m^3/s`) at
the flow station at the outlet of the simulated catchment (station
labelled 2 in Figure 1).

plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain.ini is the input file to the module
plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain. As reported on Figure 8, it contains three items
[files], [groups] and [flags]. In [files] are reported all the input
files required by the program as well as the output file which must be
ended by a typical picture format (*.png, *.jpg, …). In [groups] is
reported the name of the group to look in the result of simulation
file. With [flags] are associated three Boolean that correspond to
different options in the graphic: Qobs must be True to plot the
observed discharges, Pobs must be True to plot the observed rainfall
and nash must be True to write on the graph the Nash efficiency
comparing observed and simulated discharges.


.. figure:: _static/figures/plot-ini.png
   :alt: Simulation results
   :align: center

   **Figure 8:** File plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain.ini, input file to the
   module plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain.

In the Python shell, import the module plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain ::

   ln [4]: from pytopkapi.results_analysis import plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain
   # Create a plot of the simulated and observed discharge records
   ln [5]: plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain.run('analyse_the_results/plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain.ini')

This should create an image file called
Example_simulation_Qsim_Qobs_P_color.png (Figure 9) in the directory
TOPKAPI_Example/analyse_the_results/graphics.

.. figure:: _static/figures/flow-rain.png
   :alt: Simulation results
   :align: center

   **Figure 9:** The image file
   Example_simulation_Qsim_Qobs_P_color.png.

Plot of the soil moisture maps
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the directory TOPKAPI_Example/analyse_the_results., the last of
three files is plot_soil_moisture_maps.ini. As reported on Figure 10,
it contains three items `[files]`, `[paths]` `[calib_params]` and
`[flags]`.

`[files]` contains all the input files required by the program meaning
the two parameter files of the TOPKAPI model (cell and global), and
the result of simulation file.

In `[paths]` is reported the path in which the maps will be saved.

In `[calib_params]` are reported the four multiplying factors fac_L,
fac_Ks, fac_n_o and fac_n_c that were applied in the TOPKAPI
simulation (see Section 2.1).

In `[flags]` are reported several variables required by the program:
the maps will be plotted from the time step t1 to the time step t2,
the first time step at the beginning of the simulation being 0. Four
choices (1,2,3 or 4) are available for the variable called variable
which determines which variable is to be plotted among (1) the soil
moisture content i.e. the volume of the soil reservoir in :math:`m^3`,
(2) the water content of the overland i.e. the volume of the overland
reservoir in :math:`m^3`, (3) the saturation binary index which is 1
for the saturated cells, 0 otherwise, (4) the soil water index
i.e. the saturation rate of the cell in %.


.. figure:: _static/figures/soil-moisture-ini.png
   :alt: SSI ini file
   :align: center

   **Figure 10:** File plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain.ini, input file to the
   module plot_Qsim_Qobs_Rain.

In the Python shell, import the module plot_soil_moisture_maps::
   ln [6]: from TOPKAPI.results_analysis import plot_soil_moisture_maps
   #Create a plot of soil moisture maps
   ln [7]: plot_soil_moisture_maps.run('analyse_the_results/plot_soil_moisture_maps.ini')

This should create 20 pictures called field_SWI_0001.png,…,
field_SWI_0020.png in the directory
TOPKAPI_Example/analyse_the_results/maps. One of them is plotted on
Figure 11.

.. figure:: _static/figures/field_SWI_0006.png
   :alt: Simulated SSI map
   :align: center

   **Figure 11:** One of the 20 soil moisture maps (here the Soil
   Water Index is plotted) as a result of the program
   plot_soil_moisture_maps.

**Nota Bene**

Alternatively the entire process (from running the model to analysing
the results) can be produced by running the script contained in the
file run_example.py located in TOPKAPI_Example/.

.. literalinclude:: ../../TOPKAPI_Example/run_example.py
