==============================================================
Incorporating Green-Ampt infiltration into the PyTOPKAPI model
==============================================================

The purpose of this document is the describe the changes applied to
the PyTOPKAPI model formulation by including infiltration into the
model processes.

Infiltration calculations
-------------------------

*A few words on why Green-Ampt was chosen* - Parameters can be
estimated from available information; some authors show it's good
performance relative to observed data and full 1D solution of Richards
equation (Ma et al., 2010).; Easy to code/implement and quick to run?;
Can be extended to multiple layers (Han et al., 2001)

Description of Green-Ampt applied to PyTOPKAPI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The infiltration depth during each interval is calculated using the
Green-Ampt method (Green and Ampt, 1911). The Green-Ampt cumulative
infiltration during an infiltration event is determined by solving

.. math::
    F_{t+\Delta t} - F_t - \psi\Delta\theta ln(\frac{F_{t+\Delta t} + \psi\Delta\theta}{F_t + \psi\Delta\theta}) = K\Delta t

where :math:`F_{t+\Delta t}` is the cumulative infiltration depth at
the end of the time-step :math:`t`, :math:`F_t` is the cumulative
infiltration depth at the start of time-step :math:`t`, :math:`\psi`
is the soil suction head at the wetting front and :math:`K` is the
saturated hydraulic conductivity of the soil. :math:`\Delta\theta` is
equal to the difference between the effective porosity :math:`\eta_e`
and the effective saturation at the start of the infiltration event
:math:`s_e` . If the porosity is :math:`\eta`, the soil moisture
content at the start of the event is :math:`\theta` and the residual
soil moisture content is :math:`\theta_r`, then

.. math::
    \eta_e = \eta - \theta_r

and

.. math::
    s_e = \frac{\theta - \theta_r}{\eta_e}

so

.. math::
    \Delta\theta = \eta_e - s_e

Since PyTOPKAPI works from time-step to time-step by tracking the
water volumes in the soil, overland and channel stores, the model
keeps track of :math:`s_e`, which is updated at each time-step and
:math:`F_t` can be reset to zero each time. The Green-Ampt cumulative
infiltration equation therefore reduces to

.. math::
    F_{t+\Delta t} - \psi\Delta\theta ln(\frac{F_{t+\Delta t} + \psi\Delta\theta}{\psi\Delta\theta}) - K\Delta t = 0

This equation is non-linear in :math:`F_{t+\Delta t}` and the roots
must be obtained by an iterative technique. The solver used in
PyTOPKAPI is a modified version of the Powell hybrid method (Powell,
1970), accessed via the Scipy (Jones et al., 2001) wrappers of the
MINPACK FORTRAN library (Moré et al., 1980)

The parameters of the Green-Ampt model are :math:`K`,
:math:`\Delta\theta` and :math:`\psi`. :math:`K` and
:math:`\Delta\theta` are already easily obtainable from the PyTOPKAPI
model. Therefore :math:`\psi` must be estimated. Since :math:`\psi`
varies as a function of :math:`\theta` and soil type (Chow et al.,
1988), it is necessary to obtain a functional form for
:math:`\psi(\theta)` by soil type. El-Kadi (1985) evaluated a number
of well-known models for :math:`\psi(\theta)` by fitting them to
measured data for a selection of soil samples and comparing the model
fits. In general El-Kadi (1985) found that there was relatively little
difference in the model performances, but suggested that the Brooks
and Corey relationship (Brooks and Corey, 1964) was most insensitive
to the number of :math:`\psi` samples near saturation. This suggests
that the model is most robust out of those tested by El-Kadi (1985)
and is one of the reasons for selecting the Brooks Corey model for use
in PyTOPKAPI. The Brooks and Corey model is given by

.. math::
    \theta_e = [\frac{\psi_b}{\psi}]^\lambda

or

.. math::
    \psi = \frac{\psi_b}{\theta_e^{-\lambda}}

where :math:`\psi_b` is the bubbling pressure and :math:`\lambda` is a
pore size distribution index for the soil.

A second reason to choose the Brooks and Corey model is the
availability of model parameter estimates (:math:`\psi_b` and
:math:`\lambda`) for a large number of soil samples in the United
States produced by Rawls et al. (1982). The Brooks and Corey model
parameters given by Rawls et al. (1982) are provided 11 different soil
texture classes, which are readily available for South Africa from
Middleton and Bailey (2009), and are already used to estimate other
parameters in the PyTOPKAPI model.

Revised water transfer mechanism in the model
---------------------------------------------

Currently the total rainfall volume for each time-step enters the soil
store directly at a constant rate over the interval. The final volume
in the soil store is calculated by solving the differential equation
for a generic cell

.. math::
    \frac{dV}{dt} = a - bV^\alpha

where :math:`V` is the water volume in the store, :math:`a` is the
constant input rate during the time-step, and :math:`b` and
:math:`\alpha` are parameters describing the drainage properties of
the store.

In the current model formulation, all water entering the channel store
(if it exists) comes from upstream channel stores or from
contributions by the soil and overland stores of the cell. Water can
only exit a channel store via direct evaporation or flow to a
down-slope channel store. All other input (precipitation and flow from
upstream cells) goes directly to the soil store. The consequence of
this is that water can only enter the overland store via the mechanism
of saturation excess when the soil store becomes saturated during a
time-step. For a given cell, the total inflow rate to the overland
store :math:`Q_{in}^O` is given by

.. math::

    Q_{in}^O = Q_{in}^S - ( \frac{\Delta V^S}{\Delta t} + Q_{out}^S )

where :math:`Q_{in}^S` is the combined inflow rate to the soil store
for the current time-step as a result of rainfall, overland flow from
up-slope cells and soil drainage from up-slope cells. :math:`\Delta
V^S` is change is storage in the soil store during the interval and
:math:`Q_{out}^S` is the outflow to the down-slope cell from the
overland and soil stores. In the revised model formulation
:math:`Q_{in}^O` becomes

.. math::

    Q_{in}^O = Q_{in}^S - ( \frac{\Delta V^S}{\Delta t} + Q_{out}^S ) + P_{excess}

where :math:`P_{excess}` is calculated as

.. math::
    P_{excess} = P - F

References
----------

**Brooks R.H. and Corey A.T., 1964**, "Hydraulic properties of porous
media", Hydrology Paper No. 3, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, Colorado.

**El-Kadi A.I., 1985**, "On estimating the Hydraulic properties of
soils, Part 1. Comparison between forms to estimate the soil-water
characteristic function, Adv. Water Res., vol 8, pp 136-147.

**Green W.H. and Ampt G.A.**, 1911, "Studies on soil physics, part 1,
the flow of air and water through soils", J. Agric. Sci., vol 4(1),
pp. 1-24

**Jones E., Oliphant T., Peterson P., and others.**, 2001, "SciPy:
Open Source Scientific Tools for Python ", http://www.scipy.org/

**Middleton B.J. and Bailey A.K., 2009**, "Water Resources of South
Africa, 2005 Study", WRC Report No. TT 380/08, Water Research
Commission, Pretoria, South Africa.

**Moré J.J., Garbow B.S., and Hillstrom K.E.**, 1980, "User Guide for
MINPACK-1", Argonne National Laboratory Report ANL-80-74, Argonne,
Ill.

**Powell M.J.D.**, 1970, "A Hybrid Method for Nonlinear Equations" in
"Numerical Methods for Nonlinear Algebraic Equations", Rabinowitz P.,
editor. Gordon and Breach.

**Rawls W.J., Brakensiek D.L. and Saxton K.E., 1982**, "Estimation of
soil water properties", Trans. of the ASAE, vol 25(5), pp 1316-1320
and 1328

